---
title: Athens University Of Economics And Business (AUEB)
image: >-
  /assets/content/en/pages/unesco-chair-on-digital-methods-for-the-humanities-and-social-sciences-at-the-athens-university-of-economics-and-business-athens-greece/image.jpg
summary: Athens University Of Economics And Business (AUEB)
---
**Location:** Athens, Greece

**Contact:** John Pavlopoulos ([annis@aueb.gr](mailto:annis@aueb.gr))

The
[UNESCO Chair on Digital Methods for the Humanities and Social Sciences](https://www.dept.aueb.gr/en/unesco)
has been recently established in the [Department of Informatics](https://www.dept.aueb.gr/cs),
Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB), with the mission to advance the digital
transformation of the way of working in the Humanities and the Social Sciences within an extensive
web of international collaborations under the auspices of UNESCO. It is conceived as a hub of
interdisciplinary collaboration between five laboratories and the MSc in Digital Methods for the
Humanities within AUEB, and universities, research centers, memory institutions, networks, research
infrastructures and private organisations. In particular, the Chair brings together high-calibre
research groups with extensive expertise in knowledge representation and management, digital
curation, AI and natural language processing, information extraction and integration, machine
learning, sentiment analysis, graphics and 3D visualisation, and in applying digital methods in
cultural heritage and humanities. Chair members have leading roles in the development of the
national infrastructure [APOLLONIS](https://apollonis-infrastructure.gr/) and in advanced
international endeavours, such as [Ithaca](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-04448-z) and
[PRESIOUS](https://presious.idi.ntnu.no/).

## Services currently offered by the infrastructure

AUEB conducts widely recognized research in AI and language technology, data management, ontologies
and knowledge representation, graphics and visualisation, statistics and data science, political
economy, and economic history, while it runs a MSc Program in Digital Methods for the Humanities,
currently unique in Greece. The laboratories affiliated to the UNESCO Chair (Information Systems and
Databases Laboratory; Information Processing Laboratory; Theory, Economics and Systems Laboratory;
Laboratory of Applied Statistics, Probability and Data Analysis; Economics Laboratory) provide
space, equipment, software, online services, and data resources. Affiliated to the UNESCO Chair and
the MSc Programme are groups of the Department of Informatics, such as:

* The [Natural Language Processing Group](http://nlp.cs.aueb.gr/), developing algorithms, models,
  and systems that allow computers to process and generate natural language texts (question
  answering, natural language generation from structured data, text classification, information
  extraction and opinion mining, natural language processing tools for Greek, natural language
  processing in digital curation, machine learning).
* The [Computer Graphics Group](http://graphics.cs.aueb.gr/graphics/index.html), focusing on Shape
  Analysis and Geometry Processing, Interactive Rendering Algorithms, Lighting Optimization, Display
  Algorithms and Frame Buffer Techniques, Sampling and Compression.

The [MSc in Digital Methods for the Humanities](https://www.dept.aueb.gr/el/dmh) offers courses such
as: Programming in Python; Information and knowledge representation and organisation; Management,
curation and publication of digital assets; Data management; Applications of Digital methods in the
Humanities; Language technology; Digitization technologies, techniques and applications; Interactive
design and multimedia; Electronic lexicography; Design Thinking and Innovation; Geographic
Information Systems and Spatial Analysis in History and Archaeology; Special Topics in Digital
Methods for the Humanities; Digital Technologies in papyri and manuscripts; Legal Issues in
Information and Digital Media Management; Basic Statistics.

Moreover, innovative DH projects, such as [Block 15: A Virtual Journey](https://block15.aueb.gr/),
are currently implemented at AUEB, while training, awareness and community building activities to
promote the use of digital tools for Humanists, such as the open source tool Recogito, developed by
the Pelagios Network, are offered.

## What this TNA offers

In the context of this TNA, the UNESCO Chair on Digital Methods for the Humanities and Social
Sciences will offer mentoring in and an environment for experimentation with advanced digital
methods in the humanities. Specifically, the Chair offers workshops and welcomes residences for work
mostly in the following areas: ontology-driven information modeling, knowledge organisation and
knowledge graphs, collaborative spatio-temporal annotation, multimodal information extraction, 3D
photogrammetry and visualisation. Residents are introduced to workflows and tools developed, or
adopted and refined, by Chair members and work on running projects or bring their own data, within
compatibility constraints.

<LinkButton label="Apply Now" link={{"discriminant":"pages","value":"tna-application-process"}} />

![Image of a yellow building with trees in the forefront and three flags on the top of the building. ](/assets/content/en/pages/unesco-chair-on-digital-methods-for-the-humanities-and-social-sciences-at-the-athens-university-of-economics-and-business-athens-greece/logo.jpg)
